Method description

PROJECT TEAM

John D. Chodera <choderaj@mskcc.org> - Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center
Michael R. Shirts <michael.shirts@virginia.edu> - University of Virginia
Kai Wang <kw8cr@virginia.edu> - University of Virginia

METHODOLOGY

The sequence of the target protein was not provided as part of the SAMPL4 materials.
Correspondence with David Mobley and Tom Peat revealed that the construct was idential to PDB code 3NF8.
The sequence was extracted from the SEQRES residues of 3NF8 and modeled (using the 'automodel' capability) onto the 3NF8 reference structure provided using default settings.
A single model was generated and used as input for all subsequent stages.

The protein and ligand systems were set up with LEaP from AmberTools13. 
The protein was parameterized with the AMBER ff99sb-ildn forcefield using default protonation states and the 'mbondi2' GB radii.
The ligand was charged by enumerating 10 conformers with OpenEye Omega and assigning AM1-BCC charges to these conformations via OpenEye tools, and the charges were vveraged.
GAFF parameters were assigned to the ligand.
No counterions or other components were included.

Free energy calculations were performed with an experimental version of the YANK program [http://github.com/choderalab/yank] using a development version.
The calculation used a series of alchemical intermediates in a replica-exchange simulation using 2.5 ps of Langevin dynamics between exchange attempts.
After each exchange attempt, velocities were reassigned from the Maxwell-Boltzmann distribution.  
A Monte Carlo translation/rotation move was also added to allow the ligand to decorrelate more quickly.
Data was analyzed with the multistate Bennett acceptance ratio.
More details of this protocol are in a forthcoming publication (describing the methodology applied to the T4 lysozyme L99A) from this team.

Due to the fact that our computational resources at MSKCC only came online in the last few days of the competition, only a few ns/replica were run by the time of this submission.
Hence, there is great concern the current results are still unconverged.
